1. Preface

In 2001, Petr Hrebejk and Tim Boudreau[1] wrote an article published on CNet.com titled “The coming "open monopoly" in software” that argued the economics of software development will inevitably results open source software out competing restricted proprietary software and that despite their best efforts, vendors like Microsoft will be powerless to stop it.[2] The resulting open monopoly would be one where any software vendor could easily compete in the market because of the dominance of open source software and standards. For whatever reason, the term “open monopoly” never caught on. It could be said that the term fell well short of monopoly status.

With the clarity of the 11 years of seeing the software industry evolve, it can be safely said that Hrebejk and Boudreau were almost certainly correct. While it is true that in some software markets we are not much closer in terms of market share to even seeing an open source competitor to the top proprietary software offerings, the operating systems market comes to mind, the economics appear to clearly favor a trend in the open source direction. The march may be long, but the destination appears inevitable.

While this book was well underway when I first ran across their article, it provided the perfect answer to a question I had been struggling with. The lack of a good term to describe the central premise of the book. Free software, open source software and copyfree licenses are all terms that were closely related to the ideas I wanted to convey, but all three have very specific meanings that in the cases of free software and open source are already very well established and in all three cases vary from the ideas I wanted to convey.

I had internally wrestled with calling it Against Software Monopoly as a homage to Stephan Kinsella's Against Intellectual Monopoly and Michele Boldrin and David Levine's Against Intellectual Monopoly and that was even the working title of the draft copy when I was first working on it.

Against Intellectual Monopoly is a book by Washington University - St. Louis economists Michele Boldrin and David K. Levine that tackles the question of whether or not copyright and patent laws actually encourage innovation and creation from a purely utilitarian perspective.[3] Like most economists, the question they seek to answer to is whether or not society is made collectively better off by the existence of government monopolies over intellectual creations. As can easily be discerned from the title, their conclusion is a resounding negative.

“Against Intellectual Property” by Stephan Kinsella was first published in the Journal of Libertarian Studies in 2001 and approaches intellectual property law from a perspective that could hardly be more different than Boldrin and Levine.[4] Starting with basic libertarian principles such as property rights and self-ownership, Kinsella makes the case that intellectual property rights are not property rights at all and that the state has no business handing out such monopolies on a moral or ethical basis.

Though, I owe a great debt of gratitude to the arguments laid out by Boldrin, Levine and Kinsella for starting me on the intellectual journey that would lead me to formulate the arguments I lay out in this book, making the title exclusive a homage to their works doesn't quite fit because the arguments I make by no means exclusively apply to opponents of the existence of copyright and patents. In fact, the first chapter of the next section makes the case that the foundations of my arguments lie not in opposition to intellectual property, but in the basic opposition to a private monopoly over a good or service.

Instead of seeking to answer the question “should I be opposed to copyrights and patents?” as they do, this book attempts to answer the question “now that I am opposed to copyright, what can I do about it?” Rather than attempting to tackle or expand on the theoretical or empirical foundations of arguments in support of or opposed to the establishment of intellectual property, this book takes what is the logical next step, the application of such ideas to human action.[5]

In some ways I felt as though it was more in the tradition of libertarian author and anarchist activist Samuel Edward Konkin III, often shorthanded to SEK3, who wrote the New Libertarian Manifesto, which advocated an approach to resisting government outside of the political system. The srategy, called agorism, called for operating as often as possible outside of government purview in black and gray markets, named counter-economics. Agorism and counter-economics provided the inspiration for J. Neil Schulman’s excellent novel Alongside Night, representing to agorism what Atlas Shrugged is for Objectivism.[6]

However, as Murray Rothbard argued,[7] some people have professions that does not easily allow one to live on the black market, other situations in their personal lives that limit their ability to live outside government oversight or just are not willing to risk taking on the IRS and ending up in prison alongside Irwin Schiff.[8]

Rather than advocating complete withdrawal from interaction with the state, this book merely advocates software choices to help free software from the binds of intellectual property restrictions. Like Konkin's essay, this book attempts to apply the libertarian theories of the economists and political philosophers that came before him into a course of action to bring out the desired ends outside the system of politics.
Though the book is certainly much closer to Jeffrey Tucker’s Bourbon for Breakfast[9] with perhaps some of the culturally libertarian vibes celebrated in Matt Welch and Nick Gillespie's Declaration of Independents than Konkin’s New Libertarian Manifesto in terms of its accessibility and radical nature, this is book is not a guide to improving your own life. It is true that some of the suggestions I will make will save you money and improve your computing experience, others might require some sacrifice whether it is your time or a bit of functionality. It is in some respects the best of both worlds, the accessibility to the average person of Tucker’s lifestyle changes with the systemic and broader implications of Konkin’s manifesto.

The book also could perhaps be analogized to Richard Stallman's “GNU Manifesto” that laid out the founding principles of the free software movement. Like his essay, this book will contain not only a philosophical basis, but the beginnings of the technical instructions to get there. The idea of a title that alluded to both Konkin and Stallman's works was alluring.

The problem was still that there was no word or term to put in front of “Manifesto” in the title. Part of the book criticizes the some of ideas that free software and open source have come to stand for. Copyfree has the right idea, but this book really isn't the “Copyfree Manifesto” in the same way that Stallman's essay is the “GNU Manifesto.” It advocates a range of software choices, some copyfree, some not, and contains much more analysis. I decided to leave that title for a much more narrow, hypothetical future work than this book if the term copyfree catches on to describe the most permissive of software licenses.

When I found the Hrebejk and Boudreau article, open monopoly stepped into fill the gap in terminology that I had been trying to plug. However, titling the book just Open Monopoly was insufficient as well. 

First of all, there is no consensus about the definition of an open monopoly. In the traditional sense, the monopolist is a person or corporation,[10] the question of whether or not a piece of open software or an open software standard without an owner in the traditional sense can become a monopolist is not one I wished to deal with. Google searches and looking at the use of the term in academic literature fails to help. One college economics class PowerPoint slide defines it as a monopolist who lacks either legal protection and is able to establish a monopoly without natural monopoly conditions.[11] A 2000 paper defines an “open monopoly environment” as “an environment in which competition is possible.”[12] A 2012 paper comparing proprietary and open source monopolies refers to “open monopoly platforms” which are open platforms that achieve monopoly status, a comparable use of the term to that by Hrebejk and Boudreau. All of the definitions are related, but clearly different.

Secondly, it failed to truly capture the spirit of the book. The book is not just about what is an open monopoly or the economics of them. Using a singular noun as the title just didn’t fit. It is about creating an open monopoly, in fact creating many, whichever definition of them happens to emerge.

However, using the verb and plural forms of the words to title the book Opening Monopolies nearly perfectly captured my vision for the book. This is a book that is not just about the idea of freeing software markets from the binds of intellectual property restrictions, it is about the choices that can be made to do so.

As I have alluded to throughout this preface, the central premise of this book is to be a guide for libertarians to making decisions about software and the accompanying technology in a way that minimizes the impact and influence of intellectual property on both the software you use and on the broader software market as a whole.

In some cases, which software choice is better from the intellectual property perspective is unclear. In some cases there exist complex relationships between multiple pieces of software that have different licenses and have different patent statuses. In the coming chapters I will develop a framework of criteria the provides some guidance, but in both developing that framework and handling complex issues, it can be very helpful to keep in mind just exactly why we care about intellectual property in the first place.

Though there certainly exists multiple reasons to oppose the existence of intellecutal property, this book is written from the libertarian perspective that it is not a legitimate form of property and impedes the functioning of the free market. Thus, when in the questions of intellectual property are in doubt, the answers will be found by looking to the choice that most reduces barriers to free market exchanges.

The book starts off with a section that lays out the broad philosophical foundations of why one ought to oppose the existence of proprietary software monopolies. As I have mentioned, my own thoughts draw heavily upon libertarian ideas that cause me to oppose the existence of all copyrights and patents. However, this book is not aimed at only the audience of those who agree with me on those contentions. In what is perhaps circumstantial evidence that all supporters of free markets ought to oppose intellectual property as well, the fundamental foundations of the arguments are really grounded in the same opposition to monopoly that leads virtually everyone to oppose monopolies in general.

So broad, in fact, are these ideological foundations that could be used in support of many of these arguments, that some of the individuals who I will mention in this book reach many of the same conclusions that I do from a leftist, communitarian, anti-business perspective.[13] This book focuses more on the differences than similarities with such views and instead approaches the subject from a free market perspective.

Also contained in this section of the book are chapters outlining the basic arguments of anti-IP libertarians from both utilitarian and natural rights perspectives. In recognition that not all libertarians or free market supporters agree with those positions, there is also a chapter outlining why even support of intellectual property in general from either a utilitarian or natural rights perspective ought not stop one from agreeing that software monopolies ought to be opened up.

The next grouping of chapters moves into a discussion of software licenses and their histories. Rather than focusing on the legal aspects of the licenses, these chapters primarily concentrate on the history behind the licenses and the functional aspects of them. Separating the general background of the licenses from the comparisons of the software they are applied to helps to make that discussion flow more smoothly.
The following section establishes a framework in which to compare various software options. It discusses the advantages of open source, the problems with 

Finally, the last group of chapters is the core of this book's purpose. Each one deals with a different area of software and explains the major software options, their licenses and explains which choices you can make to free up the entire software market from those who want to use intellectual property to restrict competition, reduce your choices as a consumer and ultimately provide a lower quality product.

Before I continue, I do want to acknowledge that while anti-IP libertarians such as Kinsella, Boldrin and Levine are largely responsible for my initial interest in software IP advocacy, it is really the open source community and most notably hacker, open source evangelist and libertarian Eric S. Raymond to whom my work here owes the greatest intellectual debt. Without much of his pioneering insights into open source software from a libertarian perspective, this book would be no where close to its current quality.

Why Software

In the world of computer software, I am much more of a consumer than a creator. Though I have programmed a bit, my skill level comes nowhere close to even understanding the majority of software I use, much less recreating it or even improving upon it.

30 years ago, I’m not sure there would have been much of a reason for me to even consider the patents and licenses that governed the various software options I might use. Why should I have cared if the driver my new printer came with included a copy of the source code that would allow me to modify and make changes to the program as long as it included a functioning executable binary that I could install to allow me to print something from my computer? If I found a reason to modify or improve the code, I'm not knowledgeable enough to do so in the first place.

However in 2012, there are compelling reasons why even the average software consumer ought to care about the intellectual property that governs the software you use. Aside from my own personal interest in the subject, there are several reasons for choosing the course of software choices as a course of activism to reform intellectual property.

Decisions on what software to use are already made by hundreds of millions of Americans. I am not asking you to do something new, merely to take into account new information when you make the choices you already do. Whether it is a conscious decision or not, you make the choice of which browser to use every time you open one. You choose an operating system every time that you buy a new computer. Compared to pushing for political change by calling up your Congressman, protesting or campaign work, choosing a new browser or installing a new word processing program is incredibly easy.

The choices you make as a consumer of computer software also have a real and widespread impact. Advocates of the free market often make the case that if individuals really want something, preserving their ability to vote with the dollars in market interactions is the best way to insure it happens. In few markets is this as true as the market for software and few places can you make those choices sitting in a chair at home for free.

The market for software is one that is made especially less free than most by intellectual property. Innovation in computer software industry occurs at such a rapid pace that providing patent protection for 20 years means that by the time a patent expires, the technology is almost certain to have been replaced anyways. The rapid pace of innovation, little to no impact from expiring patents and the triviality of

Finally, outside of the political system, there are few things other than education – which is usually just the means to a political ends – that a libertarian can do to create a more libertarian world.

________________

[1] Hrebejk and Boudreau are both software developers in the Czech Republic.
[2] Petr Hrebejk and Tim Boudreau, "The coming "open monopoly" in software", CNet.com, October 24, 2001, accessed 16 May 2012, http://news.cnet.com/2010-1071-281588.html 
[3] Michele Boldrin and David K. Levine, Against Intellectual Monopoly, Cambridge University Press, 2008, available online at http://levine.sscnet.ucla.edu/general/intellectual/againstfinal.htm
[4]Stephan Kinsella “Against Intellectual Property,” Journal of Libertarian Studies 15 no. 2 (Spring 2001): 1-53, http://mises.org/document/3582.
[5] Pun made with apologies to Ludwig von Mises.
[6] A free copy of the book can be downloaded at http://alongsidenight.net/
[7] Murray N. Rothbard, "The Anti-Party Mentality", Libertarian Vanguard, August–September 1981, available online at http://mises.org/daily/3412
[8] Irwin Schiff, father of libertarian broker, author and radio host Peter Schiff, is currently serving time in prison for failure to pay taxes.
[9] Jeffrey A. Tucker, Bourbon for Breakfast, Mises Institute, 2010, available online at http://mises.org/document/5509 
[10] As some might tell you in the post Citizens United era, perhaps both.
[11] The lecture notes are by Jeff Keele of Porterhouse College and cite an economic text by Edwin G. Dolan, available online at: http://www.portervillecollege.edu/jkeele/Econ%20Power%20point/Chapter%2010%20Keele%20Monopoly.ppt
[12] Boyd-Barrett, Oliver. "National and international news agencies." International Communication Gazette 62.1 (2000): 5.
[13]Eben Moglen, “The dotCommunist Manifesto”, January 2003,  accessed July 6, 2012, online at http://emoglen.law.columbia.edu/my_pubs/dcm.html
