3. Joining the Invisible Hand

A libertarian might read the story told in the last chapter and proclaim that Microsoft's failure to lock consumers into using their Internet Explorer browser is yet another example of the triumph of the free market and proof that the anti-trust lawsuit was the wrong approach. In a general sense that claim is essentially correct. 

In this case, those people were essentially a bunch of computer programmers acting deliberately together to keep the Internet open and give people a choice of software to use it with. As Virgina Postrel somewhat predictively wrote in Reason in 1999:

>At stake is what Eric S. Raymond, editor of "The New Hacker's Dictionary" and a Linux evangelist, calls a quasi-political question: "Will the Internet culture tolerate single-vendor monopolies on critical infrastructure or not?" The answer appears to be no. Internet culture will work to undermine monopolies. And it will do so faster, and more harmoniously with the fluid nature of the technical world, than will lawyers.[1]

It is really only with the perspective of over a decade of hindsight that from Postrel's prediction about the answer to that question that we can truly say she was correct. In 2004, with Microsoft in control of well over 90% of the browsers in use, the answer appeared to be yes. The time frame of the question determines the answer because as the Internet Explorer example proves, on occasion the Internet culture will tolerate single-vendor monopolies on critical infrastructure. However, both the browser market and evidence from other areas of the Internet demonstrates that single pieces of software, such as Linux and Apache, can dominate Internet infrastructure for well over a decade with little sign of going anywhere anytime soon.

Some might argue that the culture of the Internet and the people, most importantly the server administrators, web designers and programmers, who make up that culture were secondary to the underlying economics in keeping the Internet open. That whether anyone was paying attention and fighting for certain standards and software out of principle, the superior innovation and efficiency of an open Internet and browser standards would have emerged victorious eventually. 

But, why do superior technologies emerge victorious from free market competition? 

It takes someone recognizing their superiority and choosing that product over the other available options. A complete discussion of why certain products succeed and others fail is beyond the scope of this book, but it is safe to say that superior quality alone is not always enough to succeed. It is human action that is the basis of the market economy.

Thus, it is wrong to separate the culture of the Internet from the free market. Rather than being distinct entities, the culture of the Internet and the people who comprise it are the market. Claiming that open standards are inherently economically superior and that they are preferred by the Internet culture are essentially the same argument. They are economically superior precisely because they best fulfill the desires of Internet users and innovators. 

It is possible for some of the people that make up Internet culture to erroneously believe, for example, that a single vendor monopoly over critical infrastructure would be the best way of satisfying their demands and have free market competition prove that the underlying economics support something different. However, this demonstrates merely that those people were wrong about the best means to the ends valued by Internet culture, not that the economically superior technology is different from the demands of Internet users. It doesn't prove Internet culture wrong, just those individuals' assessments of Internet culture.

In many ways the arguments that I just made about the Internet and computer software, mirror arguments libertarian economists have made about gold and the gold standard. Libertarian economists have long argued that gold is free enterprise money.[2] Their arguments are not based on what money is currently used, which would lead to the conclusion that fiat money has bested gold, but rather upon empirical evidence from history and the results of economic analysis. Were gold placed upon equal footing in market competition with other currencies, it's fairly certain that these economists would agree that informed consumers of money would choose to use gold over alternatives whether or not gold happened to be the most popular currency at the time. Furthermore, they argue that it is inevitable that gold backed currencies will win out in free market competition.

Similarly, it is my argument that software licenses that place no restrictions on the licensee, software that makes the source code available to all and open standards that make their complete and detailed documentation available for anyone to see, use and implement constitute free market software. Though it is wrong to have the government restrict people from using any software they choose and we don’t yet have as large of an empirical data set to pull from as we do with the gold standard, it is clear that such software wins out in free market competition.[3]

Such software also ought to be much less controversial than the gold standard within the libertarian community. While even some libertarians manage to come up with reasons why a free market in money is unworkable, there ought to be no debate that anyone who does not support a free market in computer software is no libertarian at all.[4]

In the same way that libertarians use tools of economic analysis to conclude that government regulations harm consumers and stifle entrepreneurial innovation, it can be shown that when software developers add features to their software that are designed to lock-in consumers and prevent the emergence of competitive choices in the market have many of the same detrimental impacts on consumers and free market competition. Of course, government actions to interfere in the free market certainly present addition moral concerns for libertarians that are not present in the purely private creation of artificial barriers to competition, like the ones Microsoft often seeks to impose on consumers.

As the afore mentioned libertarian computer programmer Eric Raymond explained in November of 1998 in reference to the Microsoft antitrust suit:

>Libertarians must be willing to forthrightly condemn such behavior. Otherwise we will justly be accused of desiring a future in which such tactics are the norm. If we are not willing to be part of the market `invisible hand' that non-coercively punishes Microsoft for its misbehavior, we invite the argument that only coercion will do.

>The only principled response to the facts is to condemn both the DOJ and Microsoft. That one party is a villain does not make the other a saint, and even the fact that one side is clearly using coercion does not automatically redeem the other from the charge of having behaved badly.[5]

This idea that libertarian rejection of coercive punishment for Microsoft comes along with it an obligation to act to non-coercively to punish them takes a strong stance on one side of an argument within the libertarian community that has been raging for decades. The debate is between what have recently been called thick and thin versions of libertarianism. The disagreement is over as Charles Johnson describes the question:

>To what extent should libertarians concern themselves with social commitments, practices, projects, or movements that seek social outcomes beyond, or other than, the standard libertarian commitment to expanding the scope of freedom from government coercion?[6]

The thin libertarians argue that the merely advocating for the end of government coercion is enough, while thick libertarians contend that libertarians ought to hold some other beliefs and values such as the view that racism is abhorrent.[7]

It shouldn't come as a surprise to you at this point that this book is a thick libertarian argument about one specific social outcome. However, I make a weaker thick libertarian claim than some in that I only believe that there is a strong correlation between being a libertarian and agreeing with my arguments rather than a causal one where being a libertarian means that you must agree with me. I fully recognize that it is possible for some libertarians not to be persuaded and don't contend that it makes them any less of a libertarian. In a Bayesian sense, I contend that given that you are a libertarian, there is a high probability that you should also prefer permissively licensed software.

To use the kinds of thickness and terminology laid out by Johnson, there are 3 kinds of thickness that provide reasons why a libertarian might be motivated to accept my argument. 

The first is thickness from grounds, the idea that whatever grounds motivated you to become a libertarian, also motivate you to have other beliefs. For example, most libertarians are libertarians at least in part because they have a positive view of the free market. Some believe free markets produce the best outcomes, while others believe that only free markets uphold the natural rights of the individual. It is possible that someone is a libertarian because they desire some kind of system of voluntary central planning, but it is certainly unlikely. Thus, arguments that appeal to the positive aspects of the free market that libertarians tend to value should also appeal to libertarians.

Second is thickness from consequences, the idea that government coercion is a precondition for certain harms and thus condemnations of them naturally flow from the libertarianism that argues they should be ended.

The final kind of thickness that I will appeal to is strategic thickness, the argument that even though libertarianism does not necessary favor certain outcomes over others, some of those outcomes create an environment more condusive to freedom. Empirical proof that the free market can adequeately produce and supply certain goods and services is not a requirement for the belief that the free market should supply those goods and services, but it certainly does make convincing others to agree with that belief much easier.

Many criticisms of thick libertarian beliefs focus on the kind of thick libertarianism that is being advocated rather than thick libertarianism itself.[8] Even some of the most ardent defenders of thin libertarianism are sometimes guilty of making arguments that strictly speaking are thick libertarian arguments.[9] The difference is often in how far those beliefs stray from core libertarian beliefs rather than the thickness of them. That explains why arguments for 



_____________

[1] Virginia Postrel, “What Really Scares Microsoft”, Reason, November 8, 1999, accessed July 11, 2012, online at http://reason.com/archives/1999/11/08/what-really-scares-microsoft/1
[2] For a recent example see Walter Block, “Gold is Free Enterprise Money”, speech given at Austrian Economics and Financial Markets conference, February 19, 2005, http://mises.org/media/1348/. For a much more comprehensive version see Murray N. Rothbard, "What Has the Government Done With Our Money" [full citation needed]. 
[3] A much stronger case will be made for this argument later in this book and particularly in the Epilogue.
[4] Yes, I know that there are some of you out there who would say people who don't want a free market in money are not really libertarians at all. However, the purpose of this book is to change your perceptions of computer software, not the term libertarian and therefore I will use the term libertarian in its broadest sense. And yes, that means recognizing that pro-central banking libertarians might exist.
[5] Eric S. Raymond, “Why Libertarians Should Not Love Bill Gates”, accessed July 9, 2012, online at http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/libgates.html
[6] Charles Johnson, "Libertarianism Through Thick and Thin", Foundation for Economic Education, July 01, 2008, online at http://www.fee.org/the_freeman/detail/libertarianism-through-thick-and-thin/#axzz2HRaL0f1y.
[7] For a good example of such a dispute, see http://bleedingheartlibertarians.com/2011/12/libertarianism-thick-and-thin/ http://lewrockwell.com/gordon/gordon90.1.html
[8] Examples of criticisms that do explicitly criticize thick libertarianism see Tom Woods 
[9] For a good example of such a criticism of left and right libertarian that doesn't use the thick and thin terminology, see Walter Block.

