11. Software Network Effects

The economics of the market for consumer computer software are often distinctive because of a phenomenon called network effects. Network effects are when a good or a service becomes more valuable when it is used by more people. These impacts can be seen in the markets for operating systems, programs that run locally on individual computers such as office suites and web browsers and in formats used to save and display text, audio, pictures and videos.

Network effects are commonly divided up into several categories, all of which apply to one software market or another. In many cases the lines between the categories overlap and apply to the same markets, which are not necessarily so clearly defined either.

Direct network effects are when increases in usage lead to a direct increase in the value of a product. An example of direct network effects is email. The more people that can be contacted via email, the more valuable it is to have email as well.

Indirect network effects are when increases in usage incentivizes the creation of valuable complementary goods. Examples of indirect network effects in computer software include operating systems spawning applications to run on them. This effect can be seen on platforms ranging from desktop operating systems like Windows to mobile ones like iOS and even in the extensions that run in web browsers like Firefox and Chrome.

Perhaps the most powerful network effects are two-sided network effects which happen when increases in usage increase the value of complementary goods used by a different set of users. In computer software this is commonly seen in the interaction between the markets for consumer software purchases and the labor market for programmers. When more people use a platform such as Linux or Playstation 3, programmers are incentivized to create more software to run on those platforms.

The interconnectedness of the software markets and the network effects can be illustrated by focusing on the software ecosystem created by a single user. For example a user could run the complete suite of Microsoft products on their computer. Windows for an operating system, Internet Explorer for a web browser and Office for a productivity suite. All of these

The tendency of operating systems to become a monopoly is evidence by the observation that the only two competitors to Microsoft’s Windows are one made and promoted by Apple, the most valuable company in the history of the world, and Linux a product that is given away for free is deemed to be enough of a better produce to dominate the server and supercomputer markets.

It has network effects in that it is most cost effective for producers and easiest for consumers if there is one standardized format. Having to put out a version of software for more than one operating system just serves to increase production costs for software producers. Not having a version of software for your computing platform of choice is a hassle for consumers. Standardization is imperative for communication technologies that work across multiple platforms, such as the internet. Standardization of web formats allows you to visit the same website whether you view it in a Chromium browser on Linux, Firefox on a Mac or Internet Explorer on Windows.

Breaking the advantages that Windows and proprietary formats gain from natural monopoly and network effects and using them to advance free software is why every user of Linux or free and open source formats is so important. Each additional Linux user gives Adobe a greater incentive to release Linux versions of their Creative Suite software and remove a huge hurdle to Linux adoption. Which in turn provides the incentive for more developers to release Linux versions of their software. Every additional user who has Libre Office and saves their word processor documents in a format like .odt instead of .doc is one step closer to breaking Microsoft Office’s hold as the standard productivity suite.

Thus each addition user creates a snowball effect by altering the economic incentives of developers and other consumers away from fully copyrighted software and towards free software.
