12. Software Network Effects

The economics of the market for consumer computer software are often distinctive because of a phenomenon called network effects. Network effects are when a good or a service becomes more valuable when it is used by more people. These impacts can be seen in the markets for operating systems, programs that run locally on individual computers such as office suites and web browsers and in formats used to save and display text, audio, pictures and videos. 

However, no services demonstrate the impact of network effects like software intended to be used for communication. In such cases, the value of the software is practically indistinguishable from the other people who are using it. Email would be worthless if you were the only user. Facebook's IPO valuation of over $100 billion was driven largely by their huge userbase.[1] The value of telecommunications networks is so dependent upon the number of users that there is a whole body of academic literature devoted to generalizing a principle for the growth of that value, the most famous example of which is Metcalf's Law.[2]

Network effects are commonly divided up into several categories, all of which apply to one software market or another. In many cases the lines between the categories overlap and apply to the same markets, which are not necessarily so clearly defined either.

Direct network effects are when increases in usage lead to a direct increase in the value of a product. An example of direct network effects is a telecommunications network. The more people that can be contacted via a program like email, the more valuable it is for everyone else have email as well.

Indirect network effects are when increases in usage incentivizes the creation of valuable complementary goods. Examples of indirect network effects in computer software include operating systems spawning applications to run on them. This effect can be seen on platforms ranging from desktop operating systems like Windows to mobile ones like iOS and even in the extensions that run in web browsers like Firefox and Chrome.

Perhaps the most powerful network effects are two-sided network effects which happen when increases in usage increase the value of complementary goods used by a different set of users. In computer software this is commonly seen in the interaction between the markets for consumer software purchases and the labor market for programmers. When more people use a platform such as Linux or Playstation 3, the greater demand there is for the labor of programmers who know how to code software to run on those platforms.

The interconnectedness of the software markets and the network effects can be illustrated by focusing on the software ecosystem created by a single user. For example a user could run the complete suite of Microsoft products on their computer. Windows for an operating system, Internet Explorer for a web browser and Office for a productivity suite. All of these 

The tendency of operating systems to become a monopoly is evidenced by the observation that the only two competitors to Microsoft’s Windows are one made and promoted by Apple, the most valuable company in the history of the world, and Linux a product that is given away for free and is deemed to be enough of a better product to dominate the server and supercomputer markets.[3] Despite these advantages, the Net Applications estimate for 2012 had Windows being run on just shy of 92% of the desktop operating systems.[4]

It has network effects in that it is most cost effective for producers and easiest for consumers if there is one standardized format. Having to put out a version of software for more than one operating system just serves to increase production costs for software producers. Not having a version of software for your computing platform of choice is a hassle for consumers. 

Standardization is imperative for communication technologies that work across multiple platforms, such as the internet. Standardization of web formats allows you to visit the same website whether you view it in a Chromium browser on Linux, Firefox on a Mac or Internet Explorer on Windows.

Breaking the advantages that Windows and proprietary formats gain from natural monopoly and network effects and using them to advance free software is why every user of Linux or free and open source formats is so important. Each additional Linux user gives Adobe a greater incentive to release Linux versions of their Creative Suite software and remove a huge hurdle to Linux adoption. Which in turn provides the incentive for more developers to release Linux versions of their software. Every additional user who has Libre Office and saves their word processor documents in a format like .odt instead of .doc is one step closer to breaking Microsoft Office’s hold as the standard productivity suite.

Thus each addition user creates a snowball effect by altering the economic incentives of developers and other consumers away from fully copyrighted software and towards free software.

[1]"When the Network Effect Goes Into Reverse" JAMES B. STEWART Published: August 17, 2012 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/18/business/Sites-Like-Groupon-and-Facebook-Disappoint-Investors.html
[2] Metcalf's Law says that the value of a network grows as a function of the number of users, n, by n(n-1)/2. However, it is most likely wrong, see for example Briscoe, Bob, Andrew Odlyzko, and Benjamin Tilly. "Metcalfe's law is wrong-communications networks increase in value as they add members-but by how much?." Spectrum, IEEE 43.7 (2006): 34-39.
[3] Citation for Linux being run on 90% of top supercomputers.
[4] http://www.netmarketshare.com/operating-system-market-share.aspx?qprid=8&qpcustomd=0
