19. Office Suites

the place where free software has the biggest ability to make a dent in the profits of proprietary manufacturers is, at least initially, not in the area of operating systems but rather in the area of productivity software. Microsoft Office increasingly represents a big source of revenue for Microsoft and there already exists a number of free software Office replacement options. Libre Office and Apache Open Office (formerly OpenOffice.org) already exist and run on Windows, Macs, Linux and BSD variants. Google Docs also is an option to replace Office products that operates entirely in the browser and can therefore

As someone who hasn’t owned a copy of Office since 2007 and has exclusively used Libre Office (and before it was forked, OpenOffice.org) and Google Docs on my personal computers for all of my word processing and spreadsheet needs, I can attest that they are not a perfect replacement. There are occasionally some formatting issues when using it with the various Microsoft formats, but especially for non-business use many people would probably prefer to keep save their money and deal with any formatting hiccups when opening .docx files.

The computer ability that it takes to try out a non-Microsoft office suite is only the know-how to download and install an application. Unlike installing a new operating system, merely downloading and installing an application is something most computer users are very familiar with. Booting into an operating system (unless you are using a virtual machine) is also a mutually exclusive software choice. Using Google Docs is even simpler for the millions of people who already have Google accounts because it requires merely going to the appropriate website. Signing up for a Google account is as easy as picking a username and password.

Increasing the popularity of open file formats and dethroning Office as the standard for productivity suites would be a huge strike against restrictively copyrighted software for multiple reasons. First, the fewer copies of Office we buy from Microsoft, the less money they have to develop proprietary software and the more likely it is that the features and capabilities of free and open source software catches up to, passes or further distances itself from the proprietary competition. Secondly, and more importantly, breaking the Office monopoly on productivity suites helps to break their more important monopoly, the use of the closed source .doc, .xls and .ppt formats as the standards for word processor, spreadsheet and presentation formats.

The increasing number of individuals or households that own or have access to multiple computers also create a number of possible scenarios for people to avoid purchasing additional copies of Microsoft Office. For example, a household that owns a desktop computer shared between family members, a laptop or two used primarily by single individuals, and uses other computers at work or in a computer lab at school could probably manage quite well with just a single copy of Microsoft Office on the shared computer or if they don’t often need to send out documents in Microsoft proprietary formats with perfect formatting, could even manage without owning a single copy. At over $100 per copy, there is also a significant financial incentive to avoiding having to purchase a copy of Office from Microsoft.

Beyond even using non-Microsoft software, the mere recognition of open format alternatives to the Microsoft proprietary formats, such as .odt instead of .doc and .docx, and the fact that Word is capable of both opening and saving in .odt formats, even if there are some formatting issues, could go a long a long ways towards breaking the Microsoft monopoly on office suites.

As I touched on in my post on the most libertarian web browser, the IP status and openness of the format that becomes a widely recognized standard is arguably more important than the IP covering the applications that utilize it. That argument is much stronger in the browser market where all browsers are given away for free rather than sold like Microsoft does with Office, even still, it might be the more important than any financial losses that come from fewer copies of Office being sold.

For example, Munich, Germany’s switch to Linux workstations from Windows was significantly complicated by the use of proprietary formats:

>Schießl says the transition required enormous background effort which involved eliminating many IT dependencies created by individual vendors over the years. More than 20,000 templates had to be consolidated and converted into new templates, macros or web applications. Most templates and text blocks are now managed via the WollMux program, which was released in 2008. Schießl said that the developers also had to adapt a number of corporate applications such as SAP for use with ODF.

If an open format had been the standard for use from the beginning, which was possible even on Windows, the costs associated with switching would have been reduced. The reduction in the costs of changing software, whether it is operating systems or office suites, creates more market competition and more choices for consumers of such software.
